# Single-stream-jet flow in still tank
!tag name=Single-stream-jet flow in still tank
     image=../media/validation/jets/single-stream-jet/jet.png
     description=Conjugate heat transfer on a flat plate
     pairs=flow_configuration:free-flow
           compressibility:incompressible
           heattransfer:none
           convection_type:forced
           transient:steady
           flow_regime:turbulent
           fluid:air
           number_of_phases:one

Free jet flows have been extensively examined through both experimental and numerical studies, especially within the realms of aeronautics, as they are generated by the exhaust flow of aircraft engines or used for blade cooling. The dynamics of jet flows are very complicated and significantly affected by factors such as the Reynolds number, nozzle diameter, fluid properties, and flow conditions. The prediction of free shear flows is highly sensitive to the accurate modeling of Reynolds stress, turbulent kinetic energy, and its dissipation rate. The absence of nearwall turbulence complexity in free jet flow allows precise evaluation of a turbulence model’s accuracy in predicting the general flow field without the interference of wall turbulence. This validation case is based on the experiment presented in Turutoglu et. all work [!cite](turutoglu2024calibration). 

## Problem Description

In this experiment a free jet flows into a large tank filled with still air.Experimental setup consists of a jet flow unit that generates a round free jet discharging from a nozzle, and an air supply system. Compressed air used to generate jet flow is stored in a tank. Flow is obtained by passing the pressurized air through a pressure regulator and then directing into a stagnation chamber. After the stagnation chamber, flow is discharged into the atmosphere passing through a nozzle. The exit diameter of the nozzle is 12 mm. Contraction ratio of the jet nozzle is 4. Jet velocity is controlled by adjusting the pressure inside the stagnation chamber with a close loop algorithm in jet flow unit system. Velocity and turbulence profiles are measured by moving the probe in the radial direction. In addition, jet centerline velocities and turbulence intensities are measured along the jet centerline to examine the change of the speed and turbulence intensity on the jet axis with increasing distance from the jet exit plane. 

The mesh used for the problem is depicted in [!ref](fig:geom).

!style halign=center
!media media/validation/jets/single-stream-jet/mesh.png style=width:100% id=fig:geom caption=The mesh geometry of the problem.

The boundary conditions for the momentum and pressure equations are the following:

!table id=tab:momentum-pressure-bc caption=Momentum and pressure boundary conditions.
| Boundary | Boundary condition |
| --- | --- |
| +Fluid inlet+ | Fixed velocity, $u_{in}=13~\frac{m}{s}$ |
| +Fluid top+ | Free stream |
| +Fluid outlet+      | Outlet pressure, $p_{out}=1.035\times10^5~Pa$ |
| +Fluid bottom and solid top+ | No-slip |

Material properties used are given in [tab:matprops].

!table id=tab:matprops caption=Material properties used in the CHT benchmark case.
| Region | Density, +$\rho$+ $\left(\frac{kg}{m^3}\right)$ | Specific Heat, +$c_p$+ $\left(\frac{J}{kg\cdot K}\right)$ | Conductivity, +$k$+ $\left(\frac{W}{m\cdot K}\right)$ | Dynamic Viscosity, +$\mu$+ $\left(Pa\cdot s\right)$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fluid (air) | 0.3525 | 1142.6 | 0.06808 | 3.95$\times 10^{-5}$ |
| Solid (fictional) | Not used | Not used | 0.2876 | Not used |

## `OpenPronghorn` Model

In the geometry created for the CFD analyses, the jet outlet diameter D was determined as 10 mm mathing the one in the source document. Aditionally, Faghani et al. [!cite](faghani2011effect) mentioned that a uniform inlet velocity profile shows better
agreement with experimental data from similar studies on jet flow. The turbulence intensity at the inlet surface was set to 5% to align with the experimental data. All other surfaces were defined with a zero atmospheric
gauge pressure opening type of boundary condition. This validation case demonstrates the simulation of a round free jet in a still tank using `OpenPronghorn` K-Epsilon model.

The velocity and turbulence intensity profiles obtained at the jet
exit for Re=10,000 using experimental methods are compared with
`OpenPronghorn` CFD results.

The mesh is generated using the MOOSE mesh generator system and includes both solid and fluid regions. A
representative section of the mesh is shown in +[fig:mesh]+ below. The cell density near the fluid–solid
interface is refined to capture strong thermal gradients. The refinement is achieved by the introduction of
mesh bias parameters.

!media media/validation/free_flow/heat_transfer/flat_plate/mesh.png style=width:70%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;text-align:center; id=fig:mesh caption=Mesh showing the fluid and solid regions in the 2D CHT channel.

Altogether, the mesh has 125 divisions horizontally in the entrance region and 250 in the fluid region
above the plate. The solid plate has 80 vertical divisions while the fluid domain 160 vertical divisions. Altogether,
the mesh consists of 80,000 quad cells. A mesh sensitivity has been carried out and the included model
provides closely converged results with the least amount of cells.

The simulation employs a +SIMPLE solver+ to obtain the steady state solution. Second order geometric average interpolation has been
used for the advection discretization, while the stress and conduction operators have been
discretized using an arithmetic average discretization. The mesh is orthogonal, so no correction terms were used.
The input file for this case is embedded below.

!listing /validation/free_flow/heat_transfer/flat_plate/cht_rob-rob.i

## Results

The jet half-width is defined as
the distance on the y axis from the centerline at any point x along the
jet axis where the velocity is equal to half of the centerline velocity at
that point, 

Two key physical quantities are being considered to build validation metrics:

1. **Vertical temperature profile:** temperature variation along the vertical line at $x=0.1~m$ .
2. **Wall temperature distribution:** temperature along the solid-fluid interface.

To judge the acceptability of the results, we utilize the analytic expressions by Luikov from
[!cite](luikov1974conjugate). These expressions utilized techniques like the boundary layer integral (BL)
and differential heat transfer (DHT). It is important to note, however, that these expressions were derived
using approximations such as assuming an averaged velocity in the boundary layer and no stream-wise
conduction in the solid and fluid domains.

[!ref](fig:vertprofile) presents the temperature profile along the $x=0.1~m$ vertical line. We see that the
numerical solution is between the two analytic expressions. As expected, the numerical results are slightly
lower than the DHT approach mainly due to the neglect of the stream-wise conduction in the corresponding derivation in DHT.

!media media/validation/free_flow/heat_transfer/flat_plate/vertical_plot.py
       image_name=vertical-temperature.png
       id=fig:vertprofile
       caption=Vertical temperature profile at 0.1 m from the leading edge of the flat plate.
       style=width:70%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;text-align:center

[!ref](fig:interfaceprofile) presents the temperature profile along the solid-fluid interface. We see considerable
differences at the leading edge of the plate where the gradients are the sharpest. Heat conduction in the solid
is especially high serving as an explanation for the experienced deviation.

!media media/validation/free_flow/heat_transfer/flat_plate/interface_plot.py
       image_name=interface-temperature.png
       id=fig:interfaceprofile
       caption=Temperature profile along the fluid-solid interface.
       style=width:70%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;text-align:center

## Discussion of results

